Susumu Ohno hypothesised that the sex chromosomes evolved from autosomes, where one of them acquired the gene for the testes determining factor. The proto-Y chromosome lost some genes to prevent crossover and loss of this gene. To compensate for the reduction in dosage, the proto-X chromosome got upregulated. Now in females, the dosage is higher than necessary due to the presence of two copies of X. To combat this, one of the X-chromosomes is inactivated.

Previously, in a project that involved Hemant from Srimonta's lab and Kishore from Mohit's lab have hypothesised that the upregulation happens as a result of activating marks present in the to-be inactivated X migrating towards the active X, causing the genes to be upregulated, albeit not globally.

However, now let us consider when the reverse happens, where the X-chromosome is reactivated. This happens in the germ cells of all females. However, in mice, it happens even in the blastocyst stage, where the imprinted X is reactivated and later inactivated randomly. Similarly, in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC), the X chromosome is reactivated on induction of reprogramming. 

So Hemant has analysed the single-cell RNA sequencing data and found that the initially inactive X slowly gets reactivated in iPSC to reach a 1:1 X:autosome ratio. Meanwhile, the active and upregulated X also comes down to baseline levels in this timeframe.

However, when Xist, the regulator of X-Chromosome inactivation, is deleted in XEN cells, the inactive X is not reactivated entirely. Meanwhile, the active X stays upregulated.

Since Mohit's lab is a systems biology lab and it has been shown that complex phenotypes can change based on the connections between interacting genes. We explored if a simple phenomenological model considering the two X-chromosomes as interacting entities could explain the observed phenomena. Also, the (high, low) & (low, high) state observed in the base case is characteristic of a toggle switch.

However, we did not want to be biased and considered a combination of model topologies to explore. The differential equations for such a system are given by the following: the first term is cross-regulation, the second is self-regulation and a constant decay in the third term. These f's can be activatory, inhibitory or have no effect modelled with hill functions given as such. 

These differential equations are fit to the time series data that we have. Since there is no inbuilt way to do so, we do it by taking some initial random values for parameters, and we solve the differential equations with them. Then, we calculate the sum of square errors between this solution evaluated at the given time points and the actual data. This is fed back into a differential evolution algorithm where the best-performing parameters are fed into the next generation until a single minimum is reached.

So initially, we tested the cross-regulatory connections by fixing the self-regulatory connection to be activatory and trying out the different possibilities. The metrics for a good fit are a lower sum of square errors and a higher R^2. So in these heatmaps, a more red value is better. The incoming connection to Xi does not matter as much for the full reactivation case. However, the incoming connection to Xa being inhibitory gives a better fit. Similarly, for the partial reactivation case, the incoming connection to Xa being inhibitory gives a better fit. Whereas the incoming connection to Xi does not matter as much, but the activatory one has a slight edge.

Similarly, we tested the cross-regulatory connections by fixing the self-regulatory connection as inhibitory and trying out the different possibilities. Here, we observe that the case that fits best for the full reactivation is when both the cross-connections are inhibitory. Whereas, for the partial reactivation case, as observed before, the incoming connection to Xa being inhibitory gives a better fit, and the connection to Xi does not matter.

Finally, we tested the self-connections while the cross-connections were kept fixed. For the full reactivation case, we observe that the connection to Xa being inhibitory gives a good fit regardless of the connection to Xi. The case where both being self activatory also perform well. However, when we go to partial reactivation, all these fail, and the case where both are self-inhibitory performs the best. Although we have cases where certain topologies fit best, the double cross inhibitory and double self inhibitory perform reasonably well and consistently across cases, leading us to consider it the likely topology.

Looking at the fits, we can see that it performs reasonably well. However, for the difference between the two cases, we can look at the coefficients of each term which can act as a proxy for the strength of connections. 

In conclusion, we showed that the double cross inhibitory and double self inhibitory best explain the different cases. However, what do these connections exactly mean? The answer is that we do not exactly know. There are differences observed in the presence of certain factors interacting with the X-chromosome genes between the cases. Competition for these factors could act as these edges. These factors could also mediate the interactions between the chromosomes through some signalling. 

In the future, we plan to fit this model for the primordial germ cell data. Here it is interesting that the initially inactive X gets hyperactivated to 2:1 X:autosomal ratio and then comes to baseline levels. However, the active X continues to stay upregulated. Additionally, we have to do some sensitivity analysis to ensure that the parameters do not change much when done multiple times.
